                    LEARNING OUTCOMES FOR SCIENCE

Introduction
Science is the outcome of human endeavour to build conceptual models to understand the world. The scientific knowledge is generated through several interconnected processes such as observation, looking for regularities and patterns, making hypotheses, devising qualitative or mathematical models, deducing their consequences, verification or falsification of theories through observations and controlled experiments and thus arriving at the principles, theories, and laws governing the physical world. Broadly speaking, these are the steps of scientific method but there is no strict order in these various steps. Sometimes, a theory may suggest a new experiment; at other times an experiment may suggest a new theoretical model. However, for a scientific theory to be acceptable, it must be verified by relevant observations and/or experiments.
Science is being taken as one of the core subjects in the
secondary school curriculum. At this stage, the concepts which are beyond the direct experiences are also introduced. The abilities like abstraction and quantitative reasoning occupy a more central place, in the secondary classes than in elementary classes. While science is still an integrated subject at secondary stage, this is the time when the disciplines of physics, chemistry, and biology begin to emerge. The child should be exposed to experiences as well as modes of reasoning that are typical of these subjects while continuing to be encouraged to look at things across disciplinary boundaries. The process by which factual knowledge can be acquired is as important as the scientific facts themselves. Hence, the pedagogy must be a judicious mix of approaches laying emphasis on the process of science rather than on the outcome only. However, integration and continuity with the upper primary stage should be reflected while dealing with the concepts at secondary stage. At this stage students should be encouraged to work with hands and tools to design more advanced technological models than at the upper primary stage. They should get opportunities for discussing and analysing issues concerning the environment and health, including reproductive and sexual health.
Pedagogical process in science should facilitate learners
to get engaged with various scientific processes such as observing, questioning, planning investigations, hypothesising, collecting, analysing and interpreting data, constructing and communicating explanations with evidences, justifying
explanations, thinking critically to consider, and evaluate alternative explanation, etc. A wide range of strategies and their imaginative combinations such as activities, experiments, projects, field visits, surveys, problem solving, group discussion, debates, role plays, etc., can comprise pedagogical processes. Teacher may create an appropriate learning environment offering space for individual learners to learn at their own pace and style; including children with special educational needs. Assessment as, for, and of learning should be an integral part of the learning process.
   In a progressive society, science can play a truly liberating role helping people out of the vicious circle of poverty, ignorance, and superstition. The learner at this stage should be encouraged to reflect on the societal issues so that the learning of science becomes meaningful in social context. Therefore participation in various curricular activities including projects that are connected with local issues and problem-solving approach using science and technology must be regarded equally important.
   To meet curricular expectations at secondary stage, the curriculum is largely organised around the seven themes - Food; Material; The World of the Living; How Things Work; Moving Things, People, and Ideas; and Natural Phenomena and Natural Resources. These themes are potentially cross- disciplinary in nature and are being used from Classes VI to X.
 Curricular Expectations
At this stage learners are expected to:
? develop understanding of concepts, principles, theories, and laws governing the physical world, consistent with the stage of cognitive development.
? develop ability to acquire and use the methods and processes of science, such as observing, questioning, planning investigations, hypothesising, collecting, analysing and interpreting data, communicating explanations with evidences, justifying explanations, thinking critically to consider and evaluate alternative explanation, etc.
? conduct experiments, also involving quantitative measurements.
? appreciate how concepts of science evolve with time giving importance to its historical prospective.
? develop  scientific  temper  (objectivity,  critical  thinking,
freedom from fear and prejudice, etc.).
? nurture natural curiosity, aesthetic sense, and creativity.
? imbibe the values of honesty, integrity, cooperation, concern for life and preservation of environment.
? develop respect for human dignity and rights, equity and equality.
 Class IX

Suggested Pedagogical Processes
Learning Outcomes
The learners may be provided with opportunities individually or in groups and encouraged to -
? observe, group or classify materials, such as mixtures, based on their properties, viz. solubility, passage of light, etc., by performing various activities. Based on the observations, a discussion may be facilitated to help arrive at the appropriate conclusions. Students with visual impairment or low vision may be motivated to observe solubility of the materials by touching (caution should be taken while using the materials).
? design and carry out activities. For example, ' Tug of war? to understand balanced and unbalanced forces. They may be encouraged to experiment by applying forces (equal and unequal) on an object in same and opposite directions, followed by peer group discussion to generalise.
? study the daily life experiences, using  interdisciplinary  approach such as the cause behind cooling of water in earthen pots. They may be encouraged to measure and compare the temperatures of water both in earthen pot and metal containers, thereby helping them to relate process of evaporation with cooling effect. Students with visual impairment or low vision may be encouraged to feel the difference in temperature by touching the surface of the containers.
? conduct survey to understand the process of spreading of diseases. They may be encouraged to collect data from doctors and nurses about various diseases. They can prepare a report on spread, causes, prevention, and cure of diseases. They may share their findings with the community through role plays, skits and also campaign for prevention.
The learner -


? differentiates materials, objects, organisms,	phenomena,	and processes, based on properties or characteristics, such as, prokaryotes and eukaryotes, plant cell and animal cell, diffusion and osmosis, simple and complex tissues, distance and displacement, speed and velocity, balanced and unbalanced forces, elements, compound and mixture, solution, suspension and colloid, isobars and isotopes, etc.
? classifies	materials,	objects, organisms,		phenomena,		and processes, based on properties or characteristics, such as, classification of plants and animals under various hierarchical sub-groups, natural resources, classification of matter based on their states (solid/liquid/gas) and composition (element/compound/ mixture), etc.
? plans and conducts investigations or experiments to arrive at and verify the facts, principles, phenomena or to seek answers to queries on their own, such as, how does speed of an object change? How do objects float/ sink when placed on the surface of a liquid? Is there any change in mass when chemical reaction takes place? What is the effect of heat on the state of substances? What is the effect of compression on different states of matter? Where are stomata present in different types of leaves? Where are growing tissues present in plants?
? relates processes and phenomena with causes and effects, such as, symptoms with diseases and causal agents, tissues with their functions, production  with  use  of  fertilisers,


? present their observations/ ideas/ learning through flow charts/ concept maps/ graphs and ICT tools.
? gather data for calculating different physical quantities, such as distance, displacement, velocity, which can be shared and discussed in groups or with peers. Rubrics can be used to assess the conversion of units and reporting results.
? collect and analyse wide variety of graphs from newspapers, magazines or the internet. They may be encouraged to draw, analyse and interpret the graphs (for example, distance-time, speed- time, or acceleration-time graphs of motion of a vehicle on a straight road)
? write chemical formulae of simple compounds, chemical equations, etc., using playway methods such as a game of cards.
? select and use appropriate devices for measuring physical quantities. They may be encouraged to find the minimum and maximum value that can be measured by an instrument and note down the readings correctly.
? collect information from books, e-books, magazines, internet, etc., to appreciate the efforts of scientists made over time, for example, various models of atoms, discovery of microscope, etc., and showcase it in the form of a project or role play.
? observe various technological devices and innovative exhibits such as waste management kits, water filtration system, using low-cost or no-cost eco- friendly materials, develop them and showcase it in science exhibitions, clubs and parent-teacher meets.
? share and discuss their beliefs and views regarding myths, taboos, superstitions, etc., by initiating an open ended debate,
process of evaporation with cooling effect, various processes of separation with the physical and chemical properties of the substances, production of sound with vibrations of source, etc.
? explains processes and phenomena, such as, functions of different organelles, spread of diseases and their prevention, effect of force on the state of motion of objects, action and reaction, rotation and revolution of planets and satellites, conservation laws, principle of separation of different gases from air, melting, boiling, freezing, how bats use ultrasonic waves to catch prey, etc.
? calculates using the data given, such as, distance, velocity, speed, frequency, work done, number of moles in a given mass of substance, concentration of solution in terms of mass by mass percentage of substances, conversion of Celsius scale to Kelvin scale and vice versa, number of neutrons in an atom from atomic number and mass number, speed of sound, kinetic and potential energies of an object, boiling points of liquids to predict the order of their separation from the mixture, etc.
? draws labelled diagrams, flow charts, concept maps, graphs, such as, biogeochemical cycles, cell organelles and tissues, human ear, distance-time and speed-time graphs, distribution of electrons in different orbits in an atom, process of distillation and sublimation, etc.
? analyses and interprets graphs and figures such as, distance-time and velocity-time graphs, computing distance, speed, acceleration of objects in motion, properties of components of a mixture to identify the appropriate method of separation, crop yield after use of fertilisers, etc.


leading to the alignment of their beliefs to the scientifically proven facts. They may also be involved in awareness campaigns in the community.
? uses scientific conventions, symbols, and equations to represent various quantities, elements, and units, such as, SI units, symbols of elements, formulae of simple compounds, chemical equations, etc.
? measures physical quantities using appropriate apparatus, instruments, and devices, such as, weight and mass of an object using spring balance, mass using a physical balance, time period of a simple pendulum, volume of liquid using measuring cylinder, temperature using thermometer, etc.
? applies learning to hypothetical situations, such as, weight of an object at moon, weight of an object at equator and poles, possibility of life on other planets, etc.
? applies scientific concepts in daily life and solving problems, such as, separation of mixtures, uses safety belts in automobiles, covers walls of large rooms with sound absorbent material, follows intercropping and crop rotation, takes preventive measures to control disease causing agents, etc.
? derives	formulae,	equations, and laws, such as, mathematical expressions  for  Newton's  second law of motion, law of conservation of momentum, expression for force of gravity, equations of motion from velocity-time graphs, etc.
? draws conclusion, such as, classification of life forms is related to evolution, deficiency of nutrients affects physiological processes in plants, matter is made up of particles, elements combine chemically in a fixed ratio to form compounds, effect of action and reaction on two different bodies, etc.


? designs models using eco-friendly resources,  such  as,  3D  model  of a cell, water purification system, stethoscope, etc.
? exhibits values of honesty, objectivity, rational thinking, freedom from myths, superstitious beliefs while taking decisions, respect for life, etc., such as, records and reports experimental data exactly, myth that sexually transmitted diseases are spread by casual physical contact, belief that vaccination is not important for prevention of diseases, etc.
? communicates the findings and conclusions effectively, such as, those derived from experiments, activities, and projects both in oral and written form using appropriate figures, tables, graphs, and digital forms, etc.
? applies the interdependency and interrelationship in the biotic and abiotic  factors of environment to promote conservation of environment, such as, organic farming, waste management, etc.

Class X

Suggested Pedagogical Processes
Learning Outcomes
The learners may be provided with opportunities individually or in groups and encouraged to -
? recognise the difference between reactions, such as, exothermic and endothermic, oxidation and reduction, etc.
? observe to understand the difference in the temperatures in both the reactions using laboratory thermometer.
? investigate the ways of segregation of waste material on the basis of their degradation property. They may be encouraged to practice the segregation of waste before disposal at home, school, and public places.
? explore the relationship between two physical quantities, such as, between potential difference across a conductor and electric current flowing through it; design, conduct, and share the findings of an activity
? find out 'why' and 'how' of processes or phenomena, such as, transportation in plants and animals, extraction of metals from ores, with the help of activities, experiments, and demonstration. The learners may be encouraged to discuss, relate, conclude and explain processes or phenomena to their peers using interdisciplinary approach.
? observe diagrams, such as that of digestive system and the names given to various organs. The learners may be motivated to make poster of the digestive system for displaying in school. They may also be provided opportunities to use ICT tools for drawing.
? collect wide variety of graphs from newspapers, magazines, or the internet, with a view to understand the information contained therein. The learners may be facilitated to draw a graph, such as V-I graph for analysing the relationship between the potential difference across a conductor and the current through it.
The learner -

? differentiates materials, objects, organisms,	phenomena,	and processes, based on, properties and characteristics, such as, autotrophic and	heterotrophic	nutrition, biodegradable and non-biodegradable substances, various types of reactions, strong and weak acids and bases, acidic, basic, and neutral salts using different indicators, real and virtual images, etc.
? classifies	materials,	objects, organisms,		phenomena,		and processes, based on properties and characteristics, such as, metals and non-metals, acid and bases on the basis of their physical and chemical properties.
? plans and conducts investigations and experiments to arrive at and verify the facts, principles, phenomena, or to seek answers to queries on their own, such as, investigates conditions necessary for rusting, tests the conductivity of various solutions, compares the foaming capacity of different types of soap samples, verifies laws of reflection and refraction of light, Ohm's law, etc. Do variegated leaves perform photosynthesis? Which gas is evolved during fermentation? Why does the shoot of a plant moves towards light?
? relates processes and phenomena with causes and effects, such as, hormones with their functions, tooth decay with pH of saliva, growth of plants with pH of the soil, survival of aquatic life with pH of water, blue colour of sky with scattering of light, deflection of compass needle due to magnetic effect of electric current, etc.
? explains processes and phenomena, such as, nutrition in human beings and plants, transportation in plants
