
Science
Class 6

Section I
Suggested pedagogical process
The learner is to be provided with opportunities in pairs /groups / individually in an inclusive setup and encouraged to-
Explore surroundings, natural processes, phenomena using senses viz. Seeing, touching, tasting,
smelling, hearing
Pose questions and find answers through reflection, discussion, designing and performing
appropriate activities, role plays, debates, use of ICT, etc.
Record the observations during the activity, experiments, surveys, field trips, etc.
Analyse recorded data, interpret results and draw inference / make generalisations and share
findings with peers and adults
Exhibit creativity presenting novel ideas, new designs /patterns, improvisation, etc.
Internalise, acquire and appreciate values such as cooperation, collaboration, honest reporting,
judicious use of resources, etc.

Section II
Learning Outcomes of NCERT
Measuring the LOs
The Learners
Identifies materials and organisms, such as, plant fibres, flowers, on the basis of observable features, i.e., appearance, texture, function, aroma, etc.
Examines observable features, i.e., appearance, texture, function, aroma, etc. in order to identify materials and organisms
Differentiates materials and organisms, such as, fibre and yarn; tap and fibrous roots; electrical conductors and insulators; on the basis of their properties, structure and functions
Examines and explains properties, structure and functions of materials and organisms, in order to differentiate them
Classifies materials, organisms and processes based on observable properties, e.g., materials as soluble, insoluble, transparent, translucent and opaque; changes as can be reversed and cannot be reversed; plants as herbs, shrubs, trees, creeper, climbers; components of habitat as biotic and abiotic; motion as rectilinear,
circular, periodic etc.
Uses observable properties, in order to classify materials, organisms and processes
Conducts simple investigations to seek answers to queries, e.g., what are the food nutrients present in animal fodder? Can all physical changes be reversed? Does a freely suspended  magnet  align  in  a  particular
direction?
Conducts simple investigations on his /her own in order to seek answers to queries



Relates processes and phenomenon with causes, e.g., deficiency diseases with diet; adaptations of animals and plants with their
habitats; quality of air with pollutants, etc.
Examines and explains processes and phenomenon in order to relate them with causes
Explains processes and phenomenon, e.g., processing of plant fibres; movements in plants and animals; formation of shadows; reflection of light from plane mirror; variations in  composition  of  air;  preparation  of
vermicompost, etc.
Explains processes and phenomena in order to relate to science behind the phenomena
/processes and develop scientific thinking skills.
Measures physical quantities and expresses in SI units, e.g., length
Measures physical quantities in order to express the measurement in SI units,
Draws labelled diagrams / flow charts of organisms and processes, e.g., parts of flowers; joints; filtration; water cycle, etc.
Draws labelled diagrams /flow charts of organisms and processes in order to demonstrate   knowledge   of   structure
/processes /relationships.
Constructs models using materials from surroundings and explains their working, e.g., pinhole camera, periscope, electric torch, etc.
Constructs models using materials from surroundings and explains their working in order to demonstrate scientific knowledge and understanding of how it works
Applies learning of scientific concepts in day- to-day life, e.g., selecting food items for a balanced diet; separating materials; selecting season appropriate fabrics; using compass needle for finding directions; suggesting ways
to cope with heavy rain / drought, etc.
Applies learning of scientific concepts in daily life /real life situations in order to solve problems /give solutions /take preventive measures /etc.
Makes efforts to protect environment, e.g., minimising wastage of food, water, electricity and generation of waste; spreading awareness to adopt rain water harvesting; care for plants,
etc.
Makes efforts to apply to daily life the understanding of environment and steps to conserve it, in order to contribute to the protection of the environment:
Exhibits  creativity  in  designing,  planning,
making use of available resources, etc.
Designs,  plans,  makes  use  of  available
resources, etc. in order to exhibit creativity.
Exhibits values of honesty, objectivity, cooperation, freedom from fear and prejudices.
Designs, plans, makes use of available resources, etc.in order to exhibit values of honesty, objectivity, cooperation, freedom
from fear and prejudices.


Section III
LEARNING OBJECTIVES MAPPED WITH LEARNING OUTCOMES ADAPTED BY CBSE
Chapter no
Learning Objectives
Learning Outcomes


Analyze the food items in order to Identify the
Identifies materials and organisms, such as, plant fibres, flowers,
1) Food: Where does it come from?
ingredients used in different food items.
on the basis of observable features, i.e., appearance, texture,
function, aroma, etc.

Identify the sources of ingredients which are used to


prepare food items.


Observe different food ingredients in order to
Makes efforts to protect environment, e.g., minimising wastage

recognize if their origin is from the part of the plant
of food, water, electricity and generation of waste; spreading

and recognize the respective part
awareness to adopt rain water harvesting; care for plants, etc.

List the animal products in order to understand how


we depend on them for our food.


Categorize organisms into Herbivores, carnivores &
Classifies materials, organisms and processes based on

omnivores based on their food habits or nutrition
observable properties, e.g., materials as soluble, insoluble,

transparent, translucent and opaque; changes as can be reversed

and cannot be reversed; plants as herbs, shrubs, trees, creeper,

climbers; components of habitat as biotic and abiotic; motion as

rectilinear, circular, periodic etc.

Chapter no
Learning Objectives
Learning Outcomes



2) Components of food

Improvise an activity to test the nutrients present in the given food items & critique their utility in adequate, inadequate & excess proportions.
Conducts simple investigations to seek answers to queries, e.g., what are the food nutrients present in animal fodder? Can all physical changes be reversed? Does a freely suspended magnet align in a particular direction?

Explain the function of each nutrients in order to discuss the
importance of nutrients in good health.
Relates processes and phenomenon with causes, e.g., deficiency diseases with diet; adaptations of animals and plants with their habitats; quality of
air with pollutants, etc.

Hypothesize consequences of eliminating any one major
nutrients in order to make a healthy food choice.



Design a balance diet plan in order to provide body sufficient nutrients it need to function properly.
Applies learning of scientific concepts in day-to- day life, e.g., selecting food items for a balanced diet; separating materials; selecting season appropriate fabrics; using compass needle for finding directions; suggesting ways to cope with
heavy rain / drought, etc.

Improvise an activity to test the nutrients present in the given food items & critique their utility in adequate, inadequate & excess proportions.
Makes efforts to protect environment, e.g., minimising wastage of food, water, electricity and generation of waste; spreading awareness to
adopt rain water harvesting; care for plants, etc.


Chapter no.
Learning Objectives
Learning Outcomes



3) Fibre to Fabric
Examine various fabrics in order to predict what they are made up of.
Differentiates materials and organisms, such as, fibre and yarn; tap and fibrous roots; electrical conductors and insulators; on the basis of their properties, structure and functions

Classify the given fabrics as Natural or Synthetic
based on their source.
Classifies materials, organisms and processes based on observable properties, e.g., materials as soluble, insoluble, transparent, translucent and opaque; changes as can be reversed and cannot be reversed; plants as herbs, shrubs, trees, creeper, climbers; components of habitat as biotic and abiotic;
motion as rectilinear, circular, periodic etc.

Describe the processing of cotton and jute fibres into yarn in order to conclude the required conditions to grow them.


Explain the various processes of making yarn from fibres in order to create the fabric.
Explains processes and phenomenon, e.g., processing of plant fibres; movements in plants and animals; formation of shadows; reflection of light from plane mirror; variations in composition
of air; preparation of vermicompost, etc.

Outline the history of textile industry in our country
Applies learning of scientific concepts in day-to-day life, e.g., selecting food items for a balanced diet; separating materials; selecting season appropriate fabrics; using compass needle for finding directions; suggesting ways to cope with heavy rain /

drought, etc.

4) Sorting materials into groups
List the objects around us in order to analyse the materials they are made up of.
Identifies materials and organisms, such as, plant fibres, flowers, on the basis of observable features, i.e., appearance, texture, function, aroma, etc.

Observe the appearance of the materials in order to differentiate them as lustre and non-
lustre material.

Differentiates materials and organisms, such as, fibre and yarn; tap and fibrous roots; electrical conductors and insulators; on the basis of their properties, structure and functions

Plan and conduct an investigation in order to classify different kinds of materials by their observable properties.

Examine the materials by compressing or scratching them in order to categorize them as
hard and soft material.

Classifies materials, organisms and processes based on observable properties, e.g., materials as soluble, insoluble, transparent, translucent and opaque; changes as can be reversed and cannot be reversed; plants as herbs, shrubs, trees, creeper, climbers; components of habitat as biotic and abiotic; motion as rectilinear, circular, periodic etc.

Observe the change in the shape of object added to water in order to categorize them as soluble
and insoluble materials.

Plan and conduct an investigation for various
objects to classify them based on whether the object sink or float in water

See through the objects in order to classify them
into opaque, transparent and translucent.

Plan and conduct an investigation in order to
classify different kinds of materials by their observable properties.
Conducts simple investigations to seek answers to queries, e.g., what are the food nutrients present in animal fodder? Can all physical changes be reversed? Does a freely suspended magnet align in a particular direction?

Plan and conduct an investigation for various objects to classify them based on whether the
object sink or float in water

Chapter no
Learning Objectives
Learning Outcomes



5) Separation of substances
Identify properties of given items and select a property that would help them easily separate the
items from each other.
Classifies materials, organisms and processes based on observable properties, e.g., materials as soluble, insoluble, transparent, translucent and opaque; changes as can be reversed and cannot be reversed; plants as herbs, shrubs, trees, creeper, climbers; components of habitat as biotic and abiotic; motion as rectilinear, circular, periodic etc.

Arrives at logical conclusion that certain specific methods can be employed to separate solid mixtures based on the size, colour or weight of the
components



Examine the solubility of salt in water in certain conditions in order differentiate the solution as saturated and unsaturated.
Conducts simple investigations to seek answers to queries, e.g., what are the food nutrients present in animal fodder? Can all physical changes be reversed? Does a freely suspended magnet align in a particular direction?

Outlines methods that can be adapted in everyday
life situations such as separation of husk from grains, separation of fine sand from coarse sand
Explains processes and phenomenon, e.g., processing of plant fibres; movements in plants and animals; formation of shadows; reflection of light from plane mirror; variations in composition of air; preparation of vermicompost, etc.

Carries out some of the improvised procedures of separation of insoluble solids from liquids in a given situation

Explains how multiple processes can be employed when the mixture has a soluble and insoluble component

Outlines methods that can be adapted in everyday life situations such as separation of husk from

